---
author: Paolo Gerbaudo
title: "Del ciber-autonomismo al ciber-populismo: una historia de la ideología del activismo digital"
category: "En Defensa del Software Libre #5"
---

Del ciber-autonomismo al ciber-populismo: una historia de la ideología del activismo digital
============================================================================================

Introducción
------------

Digital activism, a term widely used to describe different forms of
activism that utilise digital technology, has undergone a rapid
transformation since its emergence at the dawn of the web. From the
vantage-point of the mid 2010s it is possible to tentatively identify
two main waves of digital activism. The first corresponds to the early
popularization of the Internet and the rise of the web in the mid \'90s
which was accompanied by the development by a first wave of digital
activism. This wave encompassed a number of projects and initiatives
waged by tech and alternative media activists of the anti-globalisation
movement, including the alternative news site Indymedia, as well as a
number of alternative mailing lists and early hacker (or hacktivist)
groups and labs. The second wave coincides with the rise of the
so-called web 2.0 Internet of social networking sites such as Facebook,
YouTube and Twitter, which has been accompanied by the rise of
world-famous hacker collectives as Anonymous and Lulzsec, as well as the
\"social media activism\" of 15-M, Occupy and the other movements of the
squares, whose organisers have used social networking sites as platforms
of mass mobilisation. To what extent are these two phases of digital
activism simply a reflection of the evolution of digital technology, and
of the shift from web 1.0 to web 2.0, as they are often portrayed? Is
the difference between them to be understood merely as deriving from the
changing material affordances of digital technology at a time of rapid
technological innovation? Or is there something more to the
equation?[]{style=""}[]{style=""}

El activismo digital es un término ampliamente utilizado para describir
distintas formas de activismo que se sirve de la tecnología digital pero
que ha sido atravesado por una rápida transformación desde su emergencia
en el amanecer de la Internet.  En la actualidad resulta posible
identificar dos grandes olas.  La primera corresponde con la
popularización temprana de la Internet y el auge de la Web a mediados de
los '90.  Esta ola abarcó una cantidad de proyectos e iniciativas
iniciadas por las activistas de la tecnología y los medios alternativos
que se enmarcaban en el movimiento anti-globalización, incluyendo el
sitio de noticias alternativas _Indymedia_ así como las listas de correo
alternativas y algunos grupos y _labs_ hacker (o _hacktivistas_).  La
segunda ola coincide con el auge de la así llamado _Web 2.0_ y los
sitios de redes sociales como _Facebook_, _YouTube_ y _Twitter_,
acompañados por el surgimiento de los famosos colectivos hacker
_Anonymous_ y _Lulzsec_, así como el "activismo de medios sociales" del
15M, _Ocuppy_ y otros movimientos de las plazas, cuyas organizadoras
utilizaron los sitios de medios sociales como plataformas para la
movilización de masas.  ¿En qué medida estas dos fases del activismo
digital son simples reflejos de la evolucación de la tecnología digital
y del salto de la _Web 1.0_ a la _Web 2.0_, como usualmente se las
describe?  ¿Debemos entender sus diferencias como las posibilidades
materiales de una tecnología digital en un momento de rápida innovación?
¿O hay que agregar algo más a la ecuación?

The debate about the transformation of digital activism has so far
tended to follow a typical techno-deterministic tendency which reads
technology as the ultimate cause of social transformation. This
conception is belied by the popularity acquired by terms as \"revolution
2.0\" ([Ghonim 2012](#Ghonim2012)), \"wiki-revolution\" ([Ferron and
Massa 2011](#FerronMassa2012)) or \"Twitter revolution\" ([Morozov
2009](#Morozov2009)), widely used in news media and scholarly accounts
to refer to recent protest movements making use of digital technology.
The underlying rationale of these expressions is that the adoption of a
certain kind of platform, say Facebook or Twitter, automatically defines
the form of activism channelled through it. This approach stems from a
simplistic view of technology\'s effects, deeply informed by the media
theory of McLuhan and his famous moniker \"the medium is the message\"
([1967](#McLuhanFiore1967); [2011](#McLuhanetal2011)), according to
which the use of a given technological device results in a series of
inevitable consequences. The school of media ecology, deeply informed by
McLuhan\'s work has important things to say about the way in which
technology structures action, for example the way in which different
communication technologies (say telephone, TV or the Internet), carry
with them different communication architectures (one-to-one,
one-to-many, many-to-many), and different dispositions from the users of
technology ([Postman 1985](#Postman1985); [Lundby 2009](#Lundby2009)).
However, it tends to neglect a number of non-technological factors -
socio-economic, political and cultural ones - that intervene in defining
activism\'s content. To go beyond such simplified view of technology as
an un-mediated force reshaping organisational structures and protest
practices after its own image, the analysis of digital activism needs to
recuperate an understanding of ideology, understood as a worldview and
value system which shapes collective action, and of how ideology
interacts with technology in shaping activist
practices.[]{style=""}[]{style=""}

Hasta el momento, el debate sobre la transformación del activismo
digital ha tendido a seguir la típica tendencia tecno-determinista que
lee a la tecnología como la causa última de la transformación social.
Esta concepción es impulsada por la popularidad que han tomado términos
como "revolución 2.0"[@ghonim-2012],
"wiki-revolución"[@ferron-massa-2011] o
"twitter-revolución"[@morozov-2009], utilizados ampliamente en los
medios y estudios académicos para referirse a los movimientos de
protesta que se sirven de la tecnología digital.  La racionalidad
subyacente de estas expresiones es que la adopción de un cierto tipo de
plataforma, como _Facebook_ o _Twitter_, define automáticamente la forma
de activismo que se canaliza a través de ellas.  Este abordaje proviene
de una visión simplista de los efectos de la tecnología, profundamente
enraizada en la teoría de medios de McLuhan y su famosa frase "el medio
es el mensaje"[-@mcluhan-1967;-@mcluhan-2011], según la cual el uso de
un determinado dispositivo tecnológico resulta en una serie de
consecuencias inevitables.  La escuela de la ecología de medios basada
en las obras de McLuhan tiene cosas muy importantes para decir sobre la
forma en que la tecnología estructura la acción, por ejemplo la forma en
que las diferentes tecnologías de comunicación (como el teléfono, la TV
o la Internet) traen consigo distintas arquitecturas comunicacionales
(una-a-una, una-a-muchas, muchas-a-muchas) y diferentes disposiciones
para las usuarias de esas tecnologías [@postman-1985;@lubdby-2009].  Sin
embargo, tiende a descuidar los factores no-tecnológicos --los
socio-económicos, políticos y culturales-- que intervienen en la
definición del contenido del activismo.  Para superar esta visión
simplista de la tecnología como una fuerza no-mediada capaz de dar su
propia forma a las estructuras organizacionales y las prácticas de
protesta, el análisis del activismo digitales necesita recuperar una
comprensión de la ideología, entendida como una cosmovisión y un sistema
de valores que da forma a la acción colectiva y de cómo la ideología
interactúa con la tecnología para dar forma a las prácticas activistas.

Adopting this approach, in this article I develop a periodisation of
digital activism which centres around two different waves, each with its
own ideological characteristics and with its accompanying
\"techno-political\" orientations, to use the term introduced by Rodotà
to describe the nexus between politics and technology and since widely
adopted by activists and researchers. To this end I draw from my
previous theorising on digital activism ([Gerbaudo 2012](#Gerbaudo2012);
[2016](#Gerbaudo2016)) in the movement of the squares of 2011 and other
post-2011 movements.

Siguiendo este abordaje, en este artículo desarrollo una periodización
del activismo digital que se centra alrededor de dos olas, cada una con
sus características ideológicas y sus orientaciones "tecno-políticas"
propias, para usar el término introducido por Rodotà para describir el
nexo entre la política y la tecnología, adoptado tanto por activistas
como por investigadoras.  Para este fin tomaré elementos de mi trabajo
previo[@gerbaudo-2012;@gerbaudo-2016] en el movimiento de las plazas del
2011 y otros movimientos posteriores.

My argument can be schematically summarised as follows.
Anti-globalisation activists adopted a techno-political approach that I
describe as cyber-autonomist. This approach was deeply informed by the
70s and 80s counter-culture, DIY culture, and the tradition of
alternative media, from pirate radios to fanzines. These different
inspirations shared an emphasis on the struggle for the liberation of
individuals and local communities from the interference of large-scale
institution. Drawing on these antecedents, cyber-autonomism approached
the Internet as a space of autonomy. The movement of the squares has
instead adopted what I describe as a cyber-populist attitude which sees
the Internet as a space of mass mobilisation in which atomized
individuals can be fused together in an inclusive and syncretic
subjectivity. This approach reflects the populist turn that has marked
the movement of the squares, as seen in its adoption of a discourse of
the people, or of the 99% against the elites ([Gerbaudo
2017](#Gerbaudo2017)).[]{style=""}

El argumento puede ser resumido esquemáticamente así: las activistas
anti-globalización adoptaron un abordaje tecno-político al que describo
como ciber-autonomista, enraizado en la contra-cultura de los '70 y '80,
la culture DIY y la tradición de los medios alternativos, desde las
radios pirata hasta los _fanzines_.  Estas diferentes inspiraciones
compartían un énfasis en la lucha por la liberación de las personas y
las comunidades locales de la interferencia de las instituciones de
mayor escala.  Con estos antecedentes, el ciber-autonomismo tomó la
Internet como un espacio autónomo.  El movimiento de las plazas en
cambio ha adoptado una actitud ciber-populista que ve a la Internet como
un espacio de movilización de masas donde las personas individuales se
unen en una subjetividad inclusiva y sincrética.  Este abordaje refleja
el giro populista que ha marcado el movimiento de las plazas, como la
adopción de un discurso del pueblo o del 99% contra las
élites[@gerbaudo-2017].

These two techno-political orientations evidently reflect the process of
technological evolution from the more elitist web 1.0 to the massified
web 2.0 of social network sites. But their understanding cannot be
reduced to this technological transformation. It also needs to encompass
a plurality of other factors, and account for the seismic shift in
attitudes and perceptions caused by the financial crisis of 2008 and
connected ideological developments. Paralleling the turn of social
movements from anarcho-autonomism to populism as the dominant
contestational ideology, digital activism has transitioned from a view
of the Internet as a space of resistance and counter-cultural
contestation, to its understanding as a space of counter-hegemonic
mobilisation.[]{style=""}

Estas dos orientaciones tecno-políticas reflejan el proceso de evolución
tecnológica que fue desde la más elitista _web 1.0_ a la masificada _web
2.0_ con sus sitios de redes sociales.  Pero no es cuestión de
reducirlas a la mera transformación tecnológica.  También necesita
abarcar una pluralidad de otros factores y tomar en cuenta el cambio
abismal en las actitudes y percepciones causadas por la crisis
financiera de 2008 y los desarrollados ideológicos relacionados.  En
paralelo al giro de los movimientos sociales del anarco-autonomismo al
populismo como forma dominante de la ideología contestataria, el
activismo digital ha transicionado de tomar a Internet como un espacio
de resistencia y contestación contra-cultural hacia un espacio de
movilización contra-hegemónica.

The article begins with a theoretical discussion of different factors
involved in the transformation of digital activism, and in particular
the relationship between technology, politics and culture. I highlight
the need to give more attention to political, cultural and ideological
factors in the understanding of digital activism beyond the
techno-determinism that currently dominates the literature. I continue
by demonstrating how ideological shifts have shaped the transformation
of digital activism, by exploring the transition from cyber-autonomism
to cyber-populism, and how it manifests itself in a number of concrete
examples. I conclude with some reflections on the implications for
future research about digital activism, emphasising the need to bring
ideology back into the analysis of protest movements of the digital era.

El artículo comienza como una discusión teórica sobre los diferentes
factores involucrados en la transformación del activismo digital y en
particular la relación entre tecnología, política y cultura.  Se subraya
la necesidad de prestar más atención a los factores políticos,
culturales e ideológicos para comprender el activismo digital más allá
del tecno-determinismo que actualmente domina su cobertura.  Intento
demostrar cómo los cambios ideológicos han dado forma a la
transformación del activismo digital explorando la transición del
ciber-autonomismo al ciber-populismo y cómo se ha manifestado en
algunos ejemplos concretos.  Concluyo con algunas reflecciones sobre las
implicancias de investigaciones futuras sobre el activismo digital,
enfatizando la necesidad de traer la ideología de vuelta al análisis de
los movimientos de protesta de la era digital.

Techno-politics Beyond Techno-Determinism
=========================================

La tecno-política más allá del tecno-determinismo
-------------------------------------------------

Digital activism is a form of activism that by definition brings into
question the relationship between politics and technology, or to use a
term that has become en vogue among activists and researchers in recent
years, the nature and dynamics of \"techno-politics\". Techno-politics
is a term that has been coined by Italian politician and scholar Stefano
Rodotà ([1997](#Rodota1997)) to express the nexus between politics and
technology, and has since been popularised by activist scholars as
Javier Toret ([2013](#Toret2013)) in Spain to define the new field of
analysis raised by the development of digital activism. Referring to the
two constitutive concepts in the notion of techno-politics - technology
and politics - one can argue that up to this point the scholarship on
digital activism has excessively focused on the first element while
neglecting the second. Scholars have tended to read political
transformation as resulting from technological transformation, thus
overlooking that also the converse is the case, namely that changes in
political and ideological orientations modify the way technology is
conceived of and used.[]{style=""}

El activismo digital es una forma de activismo que pone en el eje de su
discusión la relación entre política y tecnología.  Para hacer uso de
un término en boga entre las activistas e investigadoras en los últimos
años, se trata de la naturaleza y la dinámica de la "tecno-política".
La tecno-política es un término acuñado por el político y académico
italiano Stefano Rotodà[-@rodota-1997] para referirse al nexo entre la
política y la tecnología y desde entonces ha sido popularizado por
académicas activistas como Javier Toret[-@toret-2013] en España, para
definir el nuevo campo de análisis que enmarca el activismo digital.  Al
referirnos a los dos conceptos constitutivos de la tecno-política,
podemos argumentar que hasta este momento los estudios sobre el
activismo digital se han enfocado excesivamente en la tecnología antes
que en la política.  Las académicas han tendido a leer la transformación
política como el resultado de la transformación tecnológica, por lo
tanto soslayando que lo inverso también es apropiado, es decir que los
cambios políticos e ideológicos modifican la forma en que la tecnología
es concebida y utilizada.

The techno-deterministic nature of much contemporary scholarship on
digital activism is seen in the way in which the nature of digital
activism is understood as deriving directly from specific properties of
technology. This is clearly seen in the debate about the effects of
media affordances on digital activism. An example, is the book by Earl
and Kimport ([2011](#EarlKimport2011)) and the way it approaches digital
media as a set of apparatuses that lower costs to participation and thus
facilitate new forms of interaction that were previously impossible. In
line with much literature coming from a political science perspective,
this account proposes an instrumental and economic understanding of
media effects, as seen in the language of \"benefits\" and \"costs\"
which it utilises to explain the use of digital technology. This
approach explains the practical advantages of digital technology to
activists but it neglects the symbolic and cultural dimension of digital
activism starting from the actual content that is channelled through
this technology. A similar critique can be made to the work of Lance W.
Bennett and Alexandra Segerberg, and their theory of what they describe
as \"connective action\" ([2012](#BennettSegerberg2012a)) in opposition
to the notion of collective action. Bennett and Segerberg claim that
social media with their allowing for increased connectivity, overcome
the collective logic of earlier social movements, and their need for
leadership and collective identity ([2012](#BennettSegerberg2012a)).
Thanks to digital technology movements can thus become more personalised
and less controlled from organisational centres. What is overlooked in
this context, is that this libertarian application of digital technology
is far from being an inevitable result. The affordances of digital
technology can be turned towards very different political ends and
coupled with very different organisational formats. It is sufficient to
think for example about the fact that radically different political
phenomena as the Occupy Wall Street movement and Donald Trump campaign
in the 2016 presidential elections have both proficiently used social
media, yet in radically different ways, and on the back of radically
different organisational structures.

La naturaleza tecno-determinista de gran parte de la academia
contemporánea sobre el activismo digital propone que la naturaleza de
esta forma de activismo se deriva directamente de propiedades
específicas de la tecnología.  Esto puede ser verse en el debate sobre
los efectos de la cobertura mediática sobre el activismo digital.  Un
ejemplo es el libro de Earl y Kimport[-@earl-kimport-2011] y la forma en
que aborda los medios digitales como un grupo de aparatos que reducen
los costos de participación y por lo tanto facilitan nuevas formas de
interacción que anteriormente eran imposibles.  En líne con gran parte
de la literatura proveniente de las ciencias políticas, esta perspectiva
propone una comprensión instrumental y económica de los efectos de los
medios, como puede verse en el lenguaje de los "costos" y "beneficios"
que utilizan para explicar el uso de la tecnología digital.  Este
abordaje explica las ventajas prácticas de la tecnología digital para
las activistas, pero omite la dimensión simbólica y cultural del
activismo digital, empezando por el mismo contenido de aquello que es
canalizado a través de esta tecnología.  Puede hacerse una crítica
similar de la obra de Lance W. Bennett y Alexandra Sederberg.  Su teoría
describe una "acción conectiva"[@bennet-sederberg-2012] en oposición a
la noción de la acción colectiva.  Argumentan que los _social media_,
con su capacidad de promover la conectividad, superan la lógica
colectiva de los movimientos sociales anteriores y su necesidad de
liderazgo e identidad colectiva[@beneet-sederberg-2012].  Gracias a la
tecnología digital, los movimientos pueden volverse más personalizados y
menos controlados por centros organizacionales.  Pero lo que se soslaya
en este contexto es que la aplicación liberadora de la tecnología
digital está muy lejos de ser el resultado inevitable.  Las
potencialidades de la tecnología digital pueden volverse hacia objetivos
políticos totalmente distintos y acoplarse a diferentes formatos
organizacionales.  Resulta suficiente pensar, por ejemplo, que fenómenos
políticos tan dispares como _Occupy Wall Street_ y la campaña
presidencial de Donald Trumb se han servido tan eficientemente de los
_social media_, aun en formas y estructuras organizacionales
radicalmente distintas.

A techno-deterministic element is arguably also present in the work of
Manuel Castells on digital activism. To be fair, Castells\' account is
far more nuanced than purely structuralist accounts originating mostly
from the field of political science. This is because Castells works in
the sociological tradition and his approach also accounts for a number
of cultural factors that are involved in shaping the Internet and
digital activism. Differently from other authors he does not see
technology as an almighty monolith but also as a social and cultural
product. In this light, Castells has interestingly argued that an
important factor to understand digital culture is the influence of the
libertarian spirit of the 1960s and 1970s protest movements and the way
it has inspired the de-centralised end-to-end architecture of the
Internet ([2004](#Castells2004)). Nevertheless, Castells\' theory of the
network society, and his view of digital technology as ushering in a
shift away from the pyramidal structure of Fordist society, and towards
network-like structures proper to the information society still contains
some techno-deterministic elements. This is due to the view of
technology as ushering what he describes as a \"morphological\"
transformation that affects the entirety of society, and that has
consequences on all social fields and organisations that adopt digital
technology. This view no doubt contains an element of truth, but it
seems to neglect the flexibility that such process of organisational
influence usually manifests. Furthermore, it is wrong in assuming that
digital technology tends to bring about an erosion of hierarchy. As I
have demonstrated in my previous work, digital activism is not an
horizontal and leaderless space, but is accompanied by the rise of new
forms of leadership ([2012](#Gerbaudo2012);
[2016](#Gerbaudo2016)).[]{style=""} []{style=""}

El elemento tecno-determinista también se encuentra presente en la obra
de Manuel Castells.  Para ser justas, el registro de Castells tiene
muchos más matices que los puramente estructuralistas que provienen del
resto de las ciencias políticas.  Esto es así porque Castells trabaja
desde la tradición sociológica y su abordaje también toma en cuenta los
factores culturales que se ponen en juego en la Internet y el activismo
digital.  A diferencia de otras autoras, no ve a la tecnología como un
monolito todopoderoso sino también como un producto social y cultural.
Desde este punto de vista, Castells ha argumentado que un factor
importante para comprender la cultura digital es la influencia del
espíritu libertario de los movimientos de protesta de los '60 y '70 y la
forma en que inspiraron la arquitectura decentralizada de la
Internet[@castells-2004].  Sin embargo, su teoría de la sociedad red y
su visión sobre la tecnología digital como apartándose de la estructura
piramidal de la sociedad fordista hacia unas estructuras de red
apropiadas a la sociedad de la información todavía contiene algunos
elementos tecno-deterministas.  La tecnología provoca un cambio
"morfológico" que atraviesa a toda la sociedad y tiene consecuencias en
todos los campos y organizaciones que adoptan la tecnología digital.
Esta perspectiva sin duda contiene un elemento de verdad, pero parece
omitir la flexibilidad con la que los procesos organizacionales son
influenciados.  Es un error asumir que la tecnología digital tiende a
erosionar las jerarquías.  Como he demostrado en mis obras anteriores,
el activismo digital no es un espacio horizontal sin líderes sino que
está acompañado por nuevas formas de
liderazgo[-@gerbaudo-2012;-@gerbaudo-2016].

A similar tendency is also seen in Castells\' work on social media.
Castells has argued that the diffusion of social media as Facebook and
Twitter has transformed internet communication and introduce a new media
logic which he describes as \"mass self-communication\"
([2009](#Castells2009)), one which combines the logic of
self-communication of face-to-face, telephone and other one-to-one
media, with the mass and one-to-many of mass media. According to
Castells this communication logic deeply informed the 2011 movements of
the Indignados, Occupy and the Arab Spring, and it strongly contributed
to their mass outreach ([2012](#Castells2012)). This view certainly
provides with a powerful rationale to understand the way in which the
second wave of digital activism has managed to go beyond the
minoritarian politics of the first wave. According to it, social media
have provided the necessary technical conditions for new forms of
digital activism to arise. However, Castells tends to neglect how in
this shift also ideological and political factors have concurred. As I
will demonstrate in the course of the article, without a change in
ideology the new opportunities of mass mobilisation offered by social
media would have not been reaped by protest movements.[]{style=""}

Esta tendencia también puede observarse en las obras de Castells sobre
los _social media_.  Castells argumenta que la difusión de _social
media_ como _Facebook_ y _Twitter_ ha transformado la comunicación en
Internet e introducido una nueva lógica mediática a la que describe como
"auto-comunicación de masas"[@castells-2009], que combina la lógica de
la auto-comunicación de los medios personales, una-a-una, como el
teléfono, con las masas y la capacidad una-a-muchas de los medios
masivos.  Según Castells, esta lógica comunicacional estuvo en la base
de los movimientos del 2011 como los indignados, _Occupy_ y la
primavera árabe y contribuyó fuertemente a su alcance
masivo[@castells-2012].  Esto ciertamente provee razones poderosas para
comprender la forma en que la segunda ola del activismo digital ha
superado las políticas minoritarias de la primera ola.  Los _social
media_ proveyeron las condiciones técnicas necesarias para que emerjan
las nuevas formas de activismo.  No obstante, Castells tiende a omitir
cómo han convergido factores ideológicos y políticos en este cambio.
Como veremos en el curso de este artículo, sin un cambio ideológico las
nuevas oportunidades de movilización de masas ofrecidas por los _social
media_ no hubieran podido ser cosechadas por los movimientos de
protesta.

The work of Jeffrey Juris, an anthropologist and a former student of
Manuel Castells has followed a similar line of reasoning, reading the
transformation of activism as resulting from technological
transformation. In his influential book *Networking Futures*
([2008](#Juris2008)) Juris argued that the anti-globalisation movement
was informed by the imaginary of the network which constituted a key
inspiration in a number of digital activism projects that emerged around
this time, including the alternative news site Indymedia, and
alternative mailing lists used by activists to organised specific
activities and campaigns. In his work about the movement of the squares
of 2011, Juris has argued that this wave has a different logic to the
anti-globalisation one. He discusses a shift from the logic of
networking of anti-globalisation activists, to what he describes as a
\"logic of aggregation\", and argues that this transformation derives
from the evolution from the web 1.0 to the web 2.0 and that the logic of
aggregation reflects the new mass outreach affordances of social media
platforms. This logic has been supported by the \"virality\", that is by
the capacity for rapid diffusion afforded by corporate social networking
sites as Facebook and Twitter, and has then been translated physically
in the occupied squares of 2011 teeming with large crowds
([2012](#Juris2012)). Juris\' inspiring analysis provides some
interesting insights about the technological underpinnings of the
transformation of protest tactics. Yet, it overlooks how this change in
the way of doing protest is also informed by significant changes in
protest culture and ideology.

La obra de Jeffrey Juris, antropólogo y alumno de Manuel Castells, ha
seguido una línea similar de razonamiento, leyendo la transformación del
activismo como resultado de la transformación tecnológica.  En su
influyente libro _Networking Futures_[-@juris-2008], Juris argumenta que
el movimiento anti-globalización se basaba en un imaginario de la red
que constituyó la inspiración clave de una cantidad de proyectos de
activismo digital que emergieron en ese tiempo, incluyendo el sitio de
noticias alternativo _Indymedia_ y las listas de correo alternativas
utilizados por las activistas para organizar actividades y campañas
específicas.  En su obra sobre el movimiento de las plazas de 2011,
Juris dice que esta ola tuvo una lógica diferente a la de la
anti-globalización.  Argumenta que hubo un cambio de una lógica de red
de las activistas anti-globalización hacia lo que describe como una
"lógica de agregación".  Esta transformación deriva de la evolución de
la _Web 1.0_ hacia la _Web 2.0_ y esta lógica de agregación refleja las
nuevas potencialidades de difusión masiva de las plataformas de _social
media_.  Esta lógica es apoyada por la "viralidad", es decir la
capacidad para la difusión rápida permitida por las redes sociales
corporativas como _Facebook_ y _Twitter_.  Esta capacidad ha sido
trasladada físicamente a las plazas ocupadas de 2011, rebosantes de
grandes multitudes[@juris-2012].  El inspirador análisis de Juris provee
algunas ideas interesantes sobre el apuntalamiento tecnológico que
encontramos en la transformación de las tácticas de protesta.  Aun así,
omite cómo este cambio en la forma de protestar también está basado en
cambios significativos en la cultura e ideología de las protestas.

[[2.1.[       ]{style="font-family: "Times New Roman"; font-style: normal; font-variant: normal; font-weight: normal; font-size: 7pt; line-height: normal; font-size-adjust: none; font-stretch: normal;"}]{style=""}]{style=""} Bringing Protest Culture Back into the Equation[]{style=""}
============================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================

While these accounts are right in identifying the influence played by
technology on contemporary politics, they often tend to adopt a
reductive understanding of this relationship of causation. A certain
type of technological arrangement is seen as automatically leading to a
certain logic of action, with little attention paid to the process of
political or cultural mediation that intervene in different concrete
examples of digital activism. Indeed, digital activism is not just a
technical phenomenon, it is a phenomenon. It is an activity that
revolves around communicating certain messages, ideas, images, and
therefore it possesses not only a technological but also a cultural
dimension. The cultural, as well as more generally the political, nature
of digital activism needs to be taken into account if we are to
understand why digital activism has developed in certain way and why it
has changed through time. To overcome the techno-deterministic bias of
contemporary debates it is necessary to pay attention to the complex
imbrication between politics, culture and technology, with specific
reference to a) the relative autonomy of politics from technology; b)
the symbolic and not only material character of technological processes;
c) the role of technology as a mediator of social relationships and ways
of life that cannot be reduced to technology alone. []{style=""}

First, a key problem in techno-deterministic accounts is the way in
which technology is seen as the independent variable always bound to
determine the logic of action of social movements and consequently steer
in a certain direction. This approach neglects what we could described
as the \"relative autonomy of political and cultural processes from
technology\" that is the way in which culture and politics are
influenced by but not reducible to technology. Technology does not
single-handedly define activism, rather activism is always informed by
the cultural contents it channels, by the ideas, images, views that it
puts forward. A number of recent works illustrate this point.

Wolfson in his book *CyberLeft* looking at the anti-globalisation
movement and its use digital media, highlights how digital media
practices are accompanied by a certain ethos and \"cultural logic\",
which approaches the Internet not just as a tool but also a space of
solidarity in which different struggles can unite ([2014,
17](#Wolfson2014)). Similarly Barassi and Trer[é]{style=""} have argued
that besides the evolution of technology it is important to take into
account the lived experience of the activists who utilize that
technology, and the way they deconstruct assumptions about the nature
and purpose of technology ([2012](#BarassiTrere2012)). Coleman has
argued that hacking is not just a technical practice but also a social
one which carries specific ethics and aesthetics, aspects which are
influenced by, but cannot be reduced to technology
([2013](#Coleman2013)). This is seen in the way in which hacker groups
construct their own language and symbology, epitomised by the mask of
Anonymous, taken from the cult movie *V for Vendetta*. Thus, it is
necessary to pay attention not only to the technical devices used by
activists, but also by the cultural contents they channel through such
technologies.

Second, it is important to account for the fact that technology is not
just a material apparatus, a technical or instrumental structure
possessing certain properties, but also a symbolic object to which a
number of meanings and cultural uses are attached. This is an aspect
that has been widely documented in the literature on the domestication
of media and technology ([Berker, Hartmann and Punie
2005](#Berkeretal2005)) and in the cultural study of science and
technology ([Menser and Aronowitz 1996](#MenserAronowitz1996); [Van Loon
2002](#VanLoon2002)). Scholars have shown that technologies can be
associated with very different meanings depending on the different
social and cultural contexts in which they are deployed and the values
and beliefs of the groups that utilise them. As Kavada has demonstrated,
not only does digital activism reflect the properties of the Internet as
a set of technical devices, but also of the internet cultures that have
emerged within it, such as hacker culture ([2013](#Kavada2013)). The
Internet is not just a technology but also a cultural space, the two
being difficult to separate from one another. This aspect calls for the
need to explore the role played by various internet cultures and
subcultures in influencing digital activism.

Third, we should avoid looking at technology instrumentally, as a
self-standing tool but appreciate the way in which technology mediates
social relationships, since this is ultimately the most important way in
which technology has an effect on social phenomena. This view is
ultimately the one which lied at the core of Marx and Engels account of
industrial technology. For them what mattered was not just the way in
which it allowed for new forms of production, but also the fact that it
materialised a relationship of oppression, in their case the one of the
bourgeoisie over the proletariat ([2002 \[1848\]](#MarxEngels2002)).
Techno-deterministic analysis tends to bracket this aspect, overlooking
the fact that technology is a mediator of a certain social relationship
be[]{style=""} it of oppression, leadership or cooperation. Furthermore,
it overlooks the way in which[]{style=""} technology is embedded in
broader social (and not just communication) ecologies and the social
relationships that are established within them.[]{style=""}

Lim has for example demonstrated how the effectiveness of social media
in circulating information relevant to the protest movements that
eventually led to the Tahrir protests in 2011, was the presence of thick
offline social networks. These were exemplified by the way in which cab
drivers in Cairo facilitated the circulation of information via
word-of-mouth, repeating to others what they had heard from passengers
about \"what Facebook was saying\" on any given day ([2012](#Lim2012)).
The effects of technology thus depend not just on its affordances but
also on the social relationships and ways of life with which it is
entangled. This aspect highlights the need to appreciate the
embeddedness of technology in different cultural communities, and the
way in which technological use depends on the customs, values and norms
adopted by these communities. []{style=""}

These different critiques call for a more nuanced account of the
relationship between technology and politics, which may render not just
how technology influences politics, but also how in turn politics
influences technology. In my contention, the way to achieve this
objective is to resurrect the notion of ideology, hereby understood in
the neutral sense as a system of values and beliefs adopted by political
and social actors and allowing them to act as a collective. Ideology is
a term that provides a way to explore the complex imbrication of
cultural, political and social factors which alongside technology
influence the way in which digital activism is performed.

A number of scholars have already begun to explore how different
technological practices carry their own ideologies. For example, Turner
has argued that the development of cyberculture was informed by the
ideology of techno-utopianism and techno-libertarianism, which was in
turn informed by the 70s and 80s counterculture, with their emphasis on
individual self-realisation and their suspicion for large-scale
institutions ([2010](#Turner2010)). Barbrook and Cameron argued that the
rise of the digital economy in the 1990s manifested an inchoate ideology
they described as the Californian ideology: a techno-libertarian
worldview bringing together hippies and yuppies
([1995](#BarbrookCameron1995)). An ideological element is also clearly
visible in social media. Social media are in fact not just a set of
applications with given material affordances. Alike other media, they
also carry their own media ideologies ([Gershon 2010](#Gershon2010)), or
in this case what we could described as \"the ideology of social media\"
manifested for example in the language, of sharing, crowd-sourcing,
friendship and collaboration they have introduced (see for example,
[Fuchs 2013, 98](#Fuchs2013); [Lovink 2011](#Lovink2011); [Van Dijck
2014, 172](#VanDijck2013)). Building on this literature about the nexus
between technology and ideology in the continuation of this article I
develop a periodisation of digital activism in two waves with distinct
ideological characteristics, and connected \"techno-political
orientations\", that is different ideologically informed ways of
conceiving of the relationship between politics and technology.

[[3.[   ]{style="font-family: "Times New Roman"; font-style: normal; font-variant: normal; font-weight: normal; font-size: 7pt; line-height: normal; font-size-adjust: none; font-stretch: normal;"}]{style=""}]{style=""} 1990s-2010s: Digital Activism from Counterculture to Counterhegemony {#s-2010s-digital-activism-from-counterculture-to-counterhegemony style="margin-left: 21.3pt; text-align: left; text-indent: -21.3pt;" align="left"}
===============================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================

Looking at the transformation of digital activism through the lens of
ideology, allows to appreciate the way in which political and cultural
factors combine with technological ones in shaping the content of
various forms of activism channelled via social media. Being a form of
activism that is deeply entangled with technology, digital activism
reflects the nature and transformation of the ecosystem of digital
communication ([Treré 2012](#Trere2012)). However, this technological
influence is \"filtered\" through a number of political and cultural
factors, and more specifically \"techno-political orientations\" that
determine how a certain technology is conceived of and utilised. This
conception of technology that I describe through the term
techno-political orientation is highly ideological in character since it
involves a value-laden view of the Internet and of its role in society
and politics, and ideological are its consequences, in the way in which
it guides collective action.

Following this line of thinking we need to explore how processes of
evolution of digital activism that are usually understood as stemming
simply from the evolution of technology do in fact also reflect a change
in the ideology of protest movements and in their techno-political
stance. This is most clearly seen in the view of an activism 1.0
followed by activism 2.0, as paralleling the transition from web 1.0 to
web 2.0 and reflecting the change in technology and affordances. It is
obvious that there is some truth to this parallel. However, as I will
endeavour to demonstrate the causes of this transformation are more
complex and cannot be reduced to technological factors alone. In fact,
these two waves of digital activism do not only coincide with two waves
of technological evolution, but also to two phases of social movement
mobilisation each with its own defining characteristics.

These two protest phases are the anti-globalisation movement around the
turn of the millennium and the movement of the squares of 2011. These
two protest movements have shared many similarities, to the point that
some activists have seen the second wave to be a continuation of the
first. At the same time these waves have also displayed different
ideological orientations, which reflect the change in the social and
political situation since the onset of the economic crisis of 2008, and
thus make these two movements interesting case studies for the purpose
of comparative analysis. While the anti-globalisation movement\'s
dominant ideology was anarcho-autonomism (or autonomism for short) as a
combination of anarchism and autonomism, the movement of the squares has
been characterised by the influence of left-wing populism ([Gerbaudo,
forthcoming](#Gerbaudo2018)). As I will endeavour to show this
ideological shift in social movements maps onto the changing
techno-political orientations of social movements: the cyber-autonomism
of the first wave, and the cyber-populism of the second wave of digital
activism.[]{style=""}[]{style=""}

[[3.1.[       ]{style="font-family: "Times New Roman"; font-style: normal; font-variant: normal; font-weight: normal; font-size: 7pt; line-height: normal; font-size-adjust: none; font-stretch: normal;"}]{style=""}]{style=""} An Ideological Periodisation of Digital Activism
=================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================

The transformation of digital activism in the last decades can be viewed
schematically as a move from the margins to the centre, of the political
arena, from a countercultural politics of resistance to a
counterhegemonic politics of popular mobilisation. According to this
interpretation, while an early form of digital activism conceived of the
Internet as a separate countercultural space, the second wave of digital
activism has approached the Internet as part of a political mainstream
to be occupied by protestors ([Gerbaudo 2015](#Gerbaudo2015)). Thus, the
first views position the Internet as a sort of sanctuary space, in which
activists can find solace from the oppressive character of society.
Conversely the second view considers the Internet as a centre-piece of
contemporary society, one which manifests its contradiction, but also
one where activists can hope to develop a process of mass mobilisation,
capable of attracting not only highly politicised people, but a
significant section of the general population.

My understanding of the evolution of digital activism and of the
presence of two distinct waves comes close to the view of Karatzogianni,
a media scholar who has been working on digital activism since the early
2000s. Karatzogianni proposes the existence of 4 waves of digital
activism ([2015](#Karatzogianni2015)). The first one from 1994 to 2001
coincides with the early phase of the anti-globalisation movement, from
the Zapatista uprising in Mexico in 1994, to the protests in Genoa 2001,
which were violently crushed by police. The second phase from 2001 to
2007 comprises the second phase of the anti-globalisation movement, and
its rise to prominence worldview. The third phase which she describes as
the \"spread of digital activism\", refers to the migration of digital
activism to BRICS and other countries beyond Europe and the US where
digital activism had first developed. The fourth phase finally is when
digital activism invades mainstream politics, with the rise of phenomena
as Wikileaks, the Arab Spring uprisings, and the Snowden affair, making
digital activism, no longer a marginal phenomenon but one that is at the
very centre of political conflicts.[]{style=""}[]{style=""}

Rather than encompassing four phases, as proposed by Karatzogianni, my
analysis is more simplified and focuses on two main waves. Furthermore,
it explains the transformation as resulting from changes in ideology,
which in turn reflect changes in the social and political situation and
connected shifts in opinions and attitudes. Focusing on ideology does
not mean to deny the role played by technological factors, and in
particular the shift from web 1.0 of static websites to web 2.0 of
social network sites. Rather it suggests that technological impact
cannot be understood merely from an instrumental perspective, but needs
to encompass an understanding of the cultural change that is facilitated
and influenced by technology, yet not reducible to technology alone. We
shall now see how this approach can be applied to the two different
phases that have been identified for the present analysis: the
anti-globalisation movement and the movement of the squares.[]{style=""}

The anti-globalisation movement developed around the turn of the
millennium and was manifested in a series of large-scale protests
against global economic institutions such as the World Bank, the World
Trade Organisation and the Group of Eight (G8) meetings. It was a
multi-faceted movement that encompassed very different ideological
streams including trade unions, Trotskyist groups, environmentalists,
third world development NGOs, and religious organisations. However, at
its core this movement and especially its younger section was deeply
informed by the ideology of autonomism or anarcho-autonomism, an hybrid
ideology drawing inspiration from post-68 anarchist and Marxist
autonomist movement, and marked by a strong anti-authoritarian and
anti-statist spirit. This ideology centred on the project of a politics
of autonomy, away from the state and the market and attempting to
construct a self-governed space of \"the common\". The movement of the
squares has instead turned towards leftwing populism, or more
specifically to a peculiar brand of populism which I describe as
citizenism, that is a populism of the citizen, rather than a populism of
the people. This ideology centres on a bottom-up recuperation and
reclamation of democracy and political institutions by ordinary
citizens, starting on their gathering in public spaces and on social
media. It yearns for the construction of a radical democracy that may
allow a more authentic participation than the one offered by corrupt
liberal-democratic institutions.[]{style=""}[]{style=""}

As we shall see, this opposition between anarcho-autonomism and populism
maps onto the opposition between cyber-autonomism and cyber-populism, as
the dominant techno-political orientations of the first and second wave
of digital activism.[]{style=""} The way in which activists have
conceived of and utilised the Internet reflects their general worldview,
their attitude towards the state, towards politics and towards the
general population and its prevalent opinions and attitudes.

[[3.2.[       ]{style="font-family: "Times New Roman"; font-style: normal; font-variant: normal; font-weight: normal; font-size: 7pt; line-height: normal; font-size-adjust: none; font-stretch: normal;"}]{style=""}]{style=""} Anti-Globalisation and Cyber-Autonomism
========================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================

Let\'s begin from the anti-globalisation movement and its digital
activism. Anti-globalisation activists pursued what could be described
as a \"cyber-autonomist\" strategy that saw the Internet as a space to
construct islands of resistance outside of the control of state and
capital. As the name suggests this communication logic revolved around
the idea of creating autonomous spaces of communication on the Internet,
away from a society controlled by capital and the state. As I have
proposed in my previous work about this issue ([2014](#Gerbaudo2014))
activists were convinced that setting up an autonomous communicative
infrastructure was a fundamental condition for any genuine alternative
communication ([2014](#Gerbaudo2014)). Building on the tradition of
alternative media in the 60s, 70s, and 80s, in the context of the
underground press, fanzine cultures and pirate radios, tech activists
hoped to use the Internet to break the monopoly of corporate news media
responsible for channelling neoliberal propaganda and shutting down all
alternative points of view. This vision lay at the foundation of an
array of alternative media initiatives pursued between the late 90s and
early 2000s ([Pickard 2006](#Pickard2006); [Juris
2008](#Juris2008)).[]{style=""}

The most visible manifestation of this strategy was Indymedia, the first
global alternative news initiative with tens of editorial nodes all over
the world. At the height of counter-summit protests, Indymedia became
the unofficial yet semi-official voice of the anti-globalisation
movement and it also constituted a fundamental organisational
infrastructure for protestors, with editorial nodes often doubling up as
political collectives directly involved in organising protest campaigns.
Besides Indymedia, alternative service providers (ISPs) such as Riseup,
Aktivix, Inventati and Autistici catered for the internal communication
needs of the movement. These groups provided secure personal email
accounts as well as listservs allowing conversations on a number of
topics of interest, ranging from protest organisation to squatting and
permaculture. The imaginary underlying all these activities was one of
\"Islands in the Net\", as expressed in the name of one of the most
important activist ISPs in Italy. Activists thought of the Internet as
something akin to the Temporary Autonomous Zones (T.A.Z.) described by
Hakim Bey, a space comprising temporary islands in a rebel archipelago
outside of the control of State and capital. The Internet was thereby
conceived as an autonomous space, one in which the movement could find a
more hospitable place to develop its action than the one otherwise
offered by a consumerist society which was heavily dominated by
neoliberal hegemony. This is why the techno-political attitude of this
phase was also strongly countercultural. It saw the Internet as a space
where to cultivate an alternative culture, clearly different from the
majority culture of the time, considered to be irremediably corrupt. The
movement of the squares projects what can be considered to a great
extent as a reversal of this position.

[[3.3.[       ]{style="font-family: "Times New Roman"; font-style: normal; font-variant: normal; font-weight: normal; font-size: 7pt; line-height: normal; font-size-adjust: none; font-stretch: normal;"}]{style=""}]{style=""} The Movement of the Squares and Cyber-Populism
===============================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================

Digital activism in the movement of the squares has instead been
characterised by a techno-political orientation I have elsewhere
([2014](#Gerbaudo2014)) described as \"cyber-populism\". By this term I
define a techno-political orientation that regards the mass web of
commercial internet services controlled by monopolistic corporations
such as Facebook, Google and Twitter, as a space that despite its
inherent capitalist biases needs to be appropriated by activists, and
whose mass outreach capabilities need to be harnessed and used for their
own ends. Rather than creating an alternative Internet - a free,
self-managed and non-commercial space of communication - contemporary
tech activists have been more concerned with harnessing the outreach
capabilities of corporate social networking sites such as Facebook and
Twitter and the digital-popular culture that has emerged on these
platforms.[]{style=""}

The examples of this cyber-populist trend abound in the wave of 2011
protests, from the Facebook page Kullena Khaled Said in Egypt, to call
hundreds of thousands to take to the streets, to the work of activists
in Spain, Greece, the US, Turkey and Brazil, who have used social media
as a means for mass mobilisation. Instead of trying to create
alternative spaces, digital activists within these movements attempted
to occupy the digital mainstream, appropriating social media as
people\'s platforms.

This strategy bears the mark of the majoritarian and popular ambition of
the Occupy wave, and the fact that these new movements do not content
themselves with constructing minoritarian spaces of resistance. By using
corporate social networking platforms, activists invade spaces they know
do not belong to them and over which they have little control, but they
do so in the persuasion that it is necessary to take them in order to
construct forms of popular mobilisation matching the technical
conditions of our era. Instead of aiming to create temporary autonomous
zones on the Internet as their predecessors in the anti-globalisation
movement, the new generation of digital activists harboured the desire
to break out of their life-style ghettoes and reconnect with the 99% of
the population they purported to fight for. One could thus describe this
position as more \'opportunistic\' in that it tries to exploit the
political opportunities that unfold within a space which is otherwise
morally questionable because of its subservience to a market logic.
However, this is also the element that has allowed these movements to be
so successful and to achieve a magnitude of mobilisation that evidently
surpasses the one achieved by anti-globalisation activists.

[[4.[   ]{style="font-family: "Times New Roman"; font-style: normal; font-variant: normal; font-weight: normal; font-size: 7pt; line-height: normal; font-size-adjust: none; font-stretch: normal;"}]{style=""}]{style=""} Conclusion {#conclusion style="margin-left: 21.3pt; text-align: left; text-indent: -21.3pt;" align="left"}
=====================================================================================================================================================================================================================================

In order to understand the transformation of digital activism it is
necessary to pay attention not just to changes in the materiality of
technology, but also to cultural, social and political factors that come
to shape its understanding and use. This is why it is imperative to
recuperate the notion of ideology, understood as the system of beliefs
and values that informs the activist worldview in any given historical
period.

As I have demonstrated in this article the difference between the first
wave of digital activism around the turn of the millennium, and the
second wave in the late 2000s and 2010s, has been shaped not just by the
transformation of digital technology and the shift from web 1.0 to the
web 2.0 of social network sites but also by changes in the ideology of
connected social movements, and in particular by the shift from
anarcho-autonomism of the anti-globalisation movement to the populism of
the movement of the squares. This ideological turn has translated, in
the context of digital activism, into a shift from cyber-autonomism to
cyber-populism, two techno-political orientations which carry different
assumptions about the role of digital technology as both a means and
site of struggle. While cyber-autonomism conceives of digital technology
as an autonomous space separate from the state and capital,
cyber-populism conceives it as a space of popular gathering and
mobilisation.

This ideological interpretation of digital activism does not entail
ignoring the role played by technology in shaping collective action.
Digital activism certainly reflects the nature of technological
affordances. For example, the process of massification of the web that
has paralleled the diffusion of social media goes a long a way towards
explaining the shift from a minoritarian to a majoritarian logic of
mobilisation in digital activism. However, technological transformation
is not the only determining factor. Its effect on the content of
activism is filtered through ideological narratives and worldviews which
contribute in shaping the way activists conceive of the Internet as a
political battlefield, an aspect that can be captured through the notion
of \"techno-political orientations\" which has been utilised in this
article.

What is required going forward is thus research that can better account
for the complex ways in which ideology shapes activist practices and
their content. This perspective would allow us to overcome some of the
shallowness of much contemporary analysis of digital activism and better
render the way in which this form of activism reflects the themes,
attitudes, and motivations of connected social movements, besides
technological factors.

References {#references style="margin-left: 0cm; text-align: left; text-indent: 0cm;" align="left"}
==========

[Barassi, Veronica, and Emiliano Treré. 2012. Does Web 3.0 come after
Web 2.0? Deconstructing theoretical assumptions through practice. *New
Media & Society* 14(8).]{#BarassiTrere2012}

[Barbrook, Richard and Andy Cameron. 1995. The Californian
Ideology. *Science as Culture* 6.1 (1996): 44-72.]{#BarbrookCameron1995}

[Bennett, W. Lance, and Alexandra Segerberg. 2012a. The Logic of
Connective Action: Digital media and the personalization of contentious
politics. *Information, Communication & Society* 15(5):
739-768.]{#BennettSegerberg2012a}

[Bennett, W. Lance, and Alexandra Segerberg. 2012b. *The Logic of
Connective Action: Digital media and the personalization of contentious
politics*.]{#BennettSegerberg2012b} [Cambridge]{style=""}[: Cambridge
University Press.]{style=""}

[Berker, Thomas, Maren Hartmann, and Yves Punie. 2005. *Domestication of
Media and Technology*. McGraw-Hill Education.]{#Berkeretal2005}

[Castells, Manuel. 2004. Informationalism, networks, and the network
society: a theoretical blueprint. In The Network Society: a
Crosscultural Perspective, edited by Manuel Castells,
3-48.]{#Castells2004} [Northampton]{style=""}[, MA]{style=""}[: Edward
Elgar.]{style=""}

[Castells, Manuel. 2009. *Communication power*.]{#Castells2009}
[Oxford]{style=""}[: Oxford University Press.]{style=""}

[[Castells, Manuel. 2012. *Networks of Outrage and Hope: Social
Movements in the Internet Age.*]{style=""}]{#Castells2012}
[[Cambridge]{style=""}]{style=""}[[: Polity Press.]{style=""}]{style=""}

[Coleman, E. Gabriella. 2013. *Coding Freedom: The ethics and aesthetics
of hacking*. Princeton:]{#Coleman2013} [Princeton]{style=""}
[University]{style=""} [Press.]{style=""}

[Earl, Jennifer, and Katrina Kimport. 2011. *Digitally Enabled Social
Change: Activism in the Internet age*.]{#EarlKimport2011}
[Cambridge]{style=""}[: MIT Press.]{style=""}

[Fenton, Natalie, and Veronica Barassi. 2011. Alternative Media and
Social Networking Sites: The politics of individuation and political
participation. *The Communication Review* 14(3):
179-196.]{#FentonBarassi2011}

[Ferron, Michela, and Paolo Massa. 2012. The Arab Spring\|
wikirevolutions: Wikipedia as a lens for studying the real-time
formation of collective memories of revolutions. *International Journal
of Communication* 5(20).]{#FerronMassa2012}

[Fuchs, Christian. 2013. *Social Media: A Critical
Introduction*.]{#Fuchs2013} [London]{style=""}[: Sage.]{style=""}

[Gerbaudo, Paolo. 2012. Tweets and the Streets: Social Media and
Contemporary Activism.]{#Gerbaudo2012} [London]{style=""}[: Pluto
Press.]{style=""}

[Gerbaudo, Paolo. 2014. Populism 2.0: Social media activism, the generic
Internet user and interactive direct democracy. In: *Social Media,
Politics and the State: Protests, Revolutions, Riots, Crime and Policing
in the Age of Facebook, Twitter and YouTube*, edited by Christian Fuchs
and Daniel Trottier, 67-87.]{#Gerbaudo2014} [London]{style=""}[: Taylor
and Francis.]{style=""}

[Gerbaudo, Paolo. 2015. Protest Avatars as Memetic Signifiers: Political
profile pictures and the construction of collective identity on social
media in the 2011 protest wave. *Information Communication & Society*
18(8).]{#Gerbaudo2015}

[Gerbaudo, Paolo. 2016. Rousing the Facebook Crowd: Digital enthusiasm
and emotional contagion in the 2011 protests in]{#Gerbaudo2016}
[Egypt]{style=""} [and Spain. *International Journal of Communication*
10(1): 254-273.]{style=""}

[]{#Gerbaudo2018}[[Gerbaudo, Paolo. 2017. *The* *Mask and the Flag:
Populism, Citizenism and Global Protest*.]{style=""}]{#Gerbaudo2017}[[
London: New York: Oxford University Press.]{style=""}]{style=""}

[Gerbaudo, Paolo. 2018 (forthcoming). *Pirate Democracy: Net Parties and
Interactive Mass Politics*. London: Pluto Press.]{style=""}

[Gershon, Ilana. 2010. Media ideologies: An introduction. *Journal of
Linguistic Anthropology* 20(2): 283-293.]{#Gershon2010}

[Ghonim, Wael. 2012. *Revolution 2.0: The power of the people is greater
than the people in power: A memoir*.]{#Ghonim2012} [Boston]{style=""}[:
Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.]{style=""}

[Hands, Joss. 2011. *@ is for activism: Dissent, resistance and
rebellion in a digital culture*.]{#Hands2011} [London]{style=""}[: Pluto
Press.]{style=""}

[Juris, Jeffrey S. 2008. *Networking Futures: The movements against
corporate globalization*.]{#Juris2008} [Durham]{style=""}[,
NC]{style=""}[: Duke University Press.]{style=""}

[Juris, Jeffrey S. 2012. Reflections on\# Occupy Everywhere: Social
media, public space, and emerging logics of aggregation. *American
Ethnologist* 39(2): 259-279.]{#Juris2012}

[Karatzogianni, Athina. 2015. *Firebrand Waves of Digital Activism
1994-2014*.]{#Karatzogianni2015} [London]{style=""}[: Palgrave Macmillan
UK.]{style=""}

[Kavada, Anastasia. 2013. Internet Cultures and Protest Movements: The
cultural links between strategy, organizing and online communication.
In: *Mediation and Protest Movements*, edited by Bart Cammaerts, Alice
Mattoni and Patrick McCurdy, 75-94.]{#Kavada2013} [London]{style=""}[:
Intellect.]{style=""}

[Lim, Merlyna. 2012. Clicks, Cabs, and Coffee Houses: Social media and
oppositional movements in]{#Lim2012} [Egypt]{style=""}[, 2004-2011.
*Journal of Communication* 62(2): 231-248.]{style=""}

[Lovink, Geert. 2011. *Network Without a Cause: A critique of social
media*.]{#Lovink2011} [London]{style=""}[: Polity Press.]{style=""}

[Lundby, Knut. 2009. *Mediatization: Concept, Changes,
Consequences*.]{#Lundby2009} [Bern]{style=""}[: Peter Lang.]{style=""}

[Marx, Karl, and Friedrich Engels. 2002 \[1848\]. *The Communist
Manifesto*.]{#MarxEngels2002} [London]{style=""}[: Penguin.]{style=""}

[Mattoni, Alice. 2016. *Media Practices and Protest Politics: How
precarious workers mobilise*.]{#Mattoni2016} [London]{style=""}[:
Routledge.]{style=""}

[McLuhan, Marshall and Quentin Fiore. 1967. *The Medium is the Massage:
An inventory of effects.*]{#McLuhanFiore1967} [London]{style=""}[:
Penguin.]{style=""}

[McLuhan, Marshall, W. Terrence Gordon, Elena Lamberti, and Dominique
Scheffel-Dunand. 2011. *The Gutenberg Galaxy: The making of typographic
man*.]{#McLuhanetal2011} [Toronto]{style=""}[: University of Toronto
Press.]{style=""}

[Menser, Michael, and]{#MenserAronowitz1996} [Stanley]{style=""}
[Aronowitz. 1996. On cultural studies, science, and technology. In
*Technoscience and Cyberculture*, edited by Stanley Aronowitz, Barbara
Matinsons and Michael Menser, 7-28. London:
Routledge.[]{style=""}]{style=""}

[Morozov, Evgeny. 2009.]{#Morozov2009} [Moldova]{style=""}[\'s Twitter
Revolution. *Foreign Policy* 7(1).]{style=""}

[Pickard, V.W., 2006. United yet autonomous: Indymedia and the struggle
to sustain a radical democratic network. *Media, Culture & Society*
28(3): 315-336.]{#Pickard2006}

[Postman, Neil. 1985. *Amusing Ourselves to Death*.]{#Postman1985} [New
York]{style=""}[: Penguin.]{style=""}

[Rodotà, Stefano. 1997. *Tecnopolitica*.]{#Rodota1997}
[Bologna]{style=""}[: Il Mulino.]{style=""}

[Toret, Javier. 2013. \"Tecnopolítica: la potencia de las multitudes
conectadas. El sistema red 15M, un nuevo paradigma de la política
distribuida.\" IN3 Working Paper Series.]{#Toret2013}

[Treré, Emiliano. 2012. Social Movements as Information Ecologies:
Exploring the coevolution of multiple Internet technologies for
activism. *International Journal of Communication* 6(19).]{#Trere2012}

[Treré, Emiliano and Alice Mattoni. 2016. Media Ecologies and Protest
Movements: Main perspectives and key lessons. *Information,
Communication & Society* 19(3), 290-306.]{#TrereMattoni2016}

[Tufekci, Zeynep, and Christopher Wilson. 2012. Social Media and the
Decision to Participate in Political Protest: Observations
from]{#TufekciWilson2012} [Tahrir Square]{style=""}[. *Journal of
Communication* 62(2): 363-379.]{style=""}

[Turner, Fred. 2010. *From Counterculture to Cyberculture: Stewart
Brand, the Whole Earth Network, and the Rise of Digital
Utopianism*.]{#Turner2010} [Chicago]{style=""}[: University of Chicago
Press.]{style=""}

[Van Dijck, José. 2013.*The Culture of Connectivity: A Critical History
of Social Media*.]{#VanDijck2013} [Oxford]{style=""}[: Oxford University
Press.]{style=""}

[Van Loon, Joost. 2002. *Risk and Technological Culture: Towards a
Sociology of Virulence*. Abingdon: Psychology Press.]{#VanLoon2002}

[Wolfson, Todd. 2014. *Digital Rebellion: The Birth of the Cyber
Left*.]{#Wolfson2014} [Champaign]{style=""}[, IL: University of Illinois
Press.]{style=""}
:::

[\
]{style="font-size: 11pt; font-family: Arial;"}

::: {.Section4}
About the Author
================

*Paolo Gerbaudo*

 

Paolo []{#0.5517548458601939}Gerbaudo is a cultural and political
theorist looking at the transformation of social movements and political
parties in a digital era. He is the Director of the Centre for Digital
Culture at King\'s College London and the author of *Tweets and the
Streets: Social Media and Contemporary Activism* (Pluto 2012), and of
the forthcoming volume *The Mask and the Flag: Populism, Citizenism and
Global Protest* (Hurst/OUP 2017). 

 

 
:::
