2.1.D. P2P as a global platform for autonomous cooperation
==========================================================

P2P como una plataforma global para la cooperación autónoma
===========================================================

We have described peer to peer as the technological infrastructure of
cognitive capitalism, and as an alternative information and
communications infrastructure. But is also emerging as much more than
that: as a whole set of enabling technologies that allow global affinity
groups to work and create value together on a autonomous basis.

Hemos descrito el P2P como la infraestructura tecnológica del capitalismo
cognitivo y también como una infraestructura alternativa de información
y comunicación.  Asimismo está emergiendo como mucho más que so: como un juego
completo de tecnologías que habilitan a grupos de afinidad globales trabajar
y crear valor en conjunto y autónomamente.

Let's quickly review what we have already seen, but in this new context.

Revisemos rápidamente lo que ya hemos visto pero bajo este nuevo contexto.

As a technological infrastructure we have seen how grid computing can
function as a way to combine untapped resources that lay dormant
throughout the network. Since human processing power is inherently
slower than computer processes, no single user uses his resources to the
full, and this capacity can now be combined in common projects. Using
this methodology any community can now mobilize vast
'super-computing'-like resources. Filesharing is also an example of the
same ability, which can be extended to any meshwork of devices that can
be connected. Resources that can be shared are computer processing
power, memory storage, any content located on any participating
computer, and collective monitoring through all kinds of interconnected
sensors. The key role in this systems is that any participant
automatically becomes a provider. Any user of the Skype telephony
networks also offers his PC as a resource for the network, as does any
filesharer, or user of Bittorrent. This obligatory participation can be
generalized because it comes at no extra cost to the owner of the
technological resource.

En tanto infraestructura tecnológica hemos visto como la computación en grilla
puede funcionar como una forma de combinar recursos que permanecen adormecidos
a través de la red.  Dado que el poder de procesamiento humano es
inherentemente más lento que los procesos computacionales, ningún usuario
individual utiliza la totalidad de sus recursos por lo que esta capacidad puede
combinarse en proyectos comunes.  Utilizando esta metodología cualquier
comunidad puede movilizar vastos recursos de "supercómputo".  La compartición
de archivos es también un ejemplo de esta habilidad que puede ser extendido
a cualquier malla de dispositivos que puedan ser conectados.  Los recursos que
pueden compartirse son el poder de procesamiento, almacenamiento de memoria,
contenido ubicado en cualquiera de las computadoras participantes y el
monitoreo colectivo realizado a través de toda clase de sensores
interconectados.  El rol clave de estos sistemas es que cualquier computadora
participante se convierte automáticamente en un proveedor.  Cualquier usuario
de la red de telefonía de Skype está ofreciendo también su computadora personal
como un recurso de la red, como lo hace cualquier compartidor de archivos
o usuario de BitTorrent.  Esta participación obligatoria puede generalizarse
porque no es un costo extra para el propietario del recurso tecnológico.

As a information and communications infrastructure it enables any group
to communicate and create online knowledge collectives and to become a
publisher. A combination of the open source infrastructure consisting of
the Linux operating system, the Apache web server, the MySQL database
system, the PHP publishing system (the four together are grouped
together under the concept of the LAMP infrastructure) combined with
BitTorrent, allow for full-scale broadband multimedia webcasting. In
addition, self-publishing, i.e. the publishing of fully-fledged print or
e-books through printing-on-demand systems that do not require the
intermediation of a formal publishers , is rapidly becoming an accepted
means of distributing books, and it is practiced even by established
authors, when they want to reach specialized audiences that are not of
interest to a traditional publisher.

En tanto infraestructura de información y comunicación permite a cualquier
grupo comunicarse y crear colectivos de conocimiento en línea al convertirse en
un editor.  La combinación de la infraestructura de código abierto que hacen el
sistema operativo Linux, el servidor web Apache, la base de datos MySQL y el
sistema de publicación PHP (llamados LAMP) en conjunto con BitTorrent, permiten
el webcasteo multimedia de banda ancha.  Sumado a esto, la autopublicación, es
decir la publicación mediante imprenta o impresión a demanda y que no requiere
de la intermediación de editores formales, se está convirtiendo rápidamente en
un medio aceptable de distribución de libros incluso siendo practicada por
autores reconocidos cuando intentar llegar a audiencias especializadas que no
resultan de interés a los editores tradicionales.

Social mobile computing enables dispersed groups to act in a coherent
fashion, it is a powerful agent of mobilization. Such mobile or
non-mobile networks are also known as 'group forming networks' since
they enable the formation of subgroups. All kinds of social software has
been developed to enable the emergence and management of webs of
cooperation which go beyond information sharing. Amongst these are the
various forms of social networking software that are based on the theory
of 'six degrees of separation' which says that anybody in the world is
connected to anybody else through no more than 6 steps.
Friends-of-a-friend software is a fast growing segment. These type of
software is often coupled to 'presencing' software which allow you to
know, who is also visiting your webpage, whom of your friends is
available for instant messaging, and mobile proximity alert services
which tell you if one of your associates is close by, by using
'geo-location' services such as GPS (Global Positioning Systems).

A crucial ingredient are the social accounting tools, which allow anyone
to judge and know about the degree of participation and trustworthyness
of other members of the network, through communal validation processes.
Similar in intent are formal ratings systems, such as the one used by
Amazon to rate books, often used to gauge the reputation and
trustworthyness (eBay, Slashdot's karma system).

Automatic referral systems or recommendation systems look to like-minded
users by presenting each other's tastes, a system also used by Amazon.
Google's success in present the most appropriate results is to a large
degree the result of its decision to rank any resource accoding to the
'collective wisdom' of web users, i.e. calculating the pointers from
other webpages. The latter are called 'implicit' referral systems since
they do not require any conscious decision by users. Sites are learning
to use the collective judgment of their participants through opinion
sites (Epinion), through social bookmarking sites, with collective
online publishing systems such as Slashdot and KuroShin using
self-evaluation ratings.

A number of companies such as Groove and Shinkuro, aim to develop fully
fledged cooperation environments .

The point of all the above is to show how software is being created that
has at its aim to enhance various forms of collaboration. We are only at
the beginning of a process whereby participation becomes embedded in
most of the new software , a move away from the individual bias which
was originally at the basis of personal computing.

Howard Rheingold and others, in an excellent overview of Technologies of
Cooperation, has outlined seven dimensions of such cooperative ventures.

​1) the structures are dynamic and evolving, not static.

​2) The rules are not imposed by any outside authority, but emerge from
the group itself

​3) The resources are made available to the public, not kept private or
available through sales

​4) Tresholds are kept as low as possible, so that anyone can
participate

​5) Feedback becomes systemic, through the use of social accounting
software and other forms of 'participation capture'

​6) Memory is becoming persistent, and no longer ephemeral as it was in
the first phase of everchanging URL's

​7) Identity is derived from the group and participation in the group

Howard Rheingold has also distilled seven recommendations to anyone
thinking of launching technology-enabled cooperative ventures:

​1) shift from designing systems to providing platforms. The system must
allow emergent structures decided upon by the participants

​2) engage the community in designing the rules: the protocol must be
democratically arrived at

​3) learn how to tap invisible resources

​4) track thresholds and phase changes: this is important as online
communities evolve through various phases that have different rules and
success factors

​5) foster diverse feedback loops

​6) convert present knowledge into deep memory: through archiving,
persistent addressing, version control and archiving, contributions are
never disgarded but remain available

​7) support participatory identities, through keeping track of
contributions so that this process acts as a recognition for the
participants.

It is important to envisage the availability of such an ecology of
cooperative tools as enabling autonomous cooperation and peer
production, and not just as an auxiliary to the corporate world. In our
overview of the emergence of P2P in the economic sphere we will see that
this is not a pious wish.
